# Why is some tech hard?

Since becoming a little bit more involved in the startup scene and familiarising myself with the particular mentality and worldview prevalent within it, I’ve noticed some limitations with the common wisdom when applied to certain types of products. The bible of the silicon valley startup scene is a book by Eric Ries, The Lean Startup. The crux of the thesis is that instead of spending a lot of time and energy producing a polished product, startups should instead expend as little effort as possible producing a minimum viable product (an “MVP” in startup jargon) and then work as closely as possible with potential customers in a continuous, rapid design-build-test cycle to produce something which they truly want. While this is good advice– especially for scientists who are prone to solving idealised or abstracted problems and often fail to imagine how their solution might fit into the commercial ecosystem– in practice things are vastly differently for products which I’ve come to call “hard-tech”. In this sense I'm defining hard-tech as technology which takes a large amount of time and capital to produce a minimum viable product and for which the design-build-test cycle is inherently slow. Pharmaceuticals are the archetypal hard-tech, and the archetypal soft-tech would be the app– although the lines between the two are far from clear.

This distinction has some interesting implications when applying “innovation thinking” to hard-tech solutions. Firstly, you greatly limit the pool of people from whom you can source solutions. Not only do you need people with the deep technical expertise, they need to have the time and money to develop a minimum viable product, which could take years. This destroys the startup goal of being “ramen profitable” (making just enough money to live off of instant noodles so you can dedicate yourself 100% to the project), because in hard-tech the operating costs are so high the difference between being ramen profitable and earning livable wage is negligible. To make matters worse, along with all the time and money you need, prototyping a hard-tech product generally requires all the infrastructure of a major research organisation with access to equipment, consumables and the licences to use them.

One thing which quickly becomes clear: you can’t rely on up-start university dropouts working from their parent’s garage to deliver industry-disrupting technologies. So who do we look to for these hard-tech solutions? Well, those best positioned to innovate in this space are researchers, who not only have the technical expertise necessary but are implanted within the very organisations with the infrastructure they need. But Australian research organisations are notoriously bad at translating research into commercial products, famously coming in at 9th in research output but a woeful [81st out of 143 OECD countries in 2013](http://www.oecd.org/sti/scoreboard.htm). There is no straightforward explanation for why this might be (although I hope to explore the topic in a future blog post) but I do want to highlight one aspect which I think is relevant here: would-be innovator-scientists are not just busy being scientists, the system they’re in practically guarantees that they do not innovate. Those who are most likely to innovate– the young, hungry and ambitious–  have no flexibility, and those who do– the grant-holders, principal-investigators and lab-heads– have increasingly more to lose and less incentive to do so as their career progresses.

Another interesting consequence of the hard-tech distinction is that individuals are typically incapable of taking all the risk of a venture upon themselves and require at least some outside funding. This has impact for public policy; if the government wants innovation in hard-tech, someone has to be willing to fork out, a change in culture alone is not enough. I don’t have a good idea of where or how that money is best spent, but I do think that it has to come with access to the infrastructure of a research organisation and it has to be available to anyone with a good idea whose incentives are tied to the successful development of a commercial product.

My two take away messages for hard-tech are these: firstly, if government wants to encourage innovation they have to find someone to loosen the purse strings, because without external capital even the best talent with the best ideas and the best intentions won't get anywhere. Secondly, if universities want to encourage innovation they have to provide a framework which allows researchers the flexibility and funding to pursue ideas which may not result in a direct publication output.

_Jake Parker_